% abstract
The evolutionary process was the main responsible for the
differentiation between living beings and one of contemporary theories
about how this process occurs states that, during the course of
evolution, genetic changes occurred, creating different kinds of
living beings. Many of these changes are due to point mutation that
modify the DNA sequence, preventing that information from being
expressed, or forcing it to be expressed in another way. The sequence
comparison is the most common method to characterize the occurrence of
point mutation, and is one of the most discussed problems in
Computational Biology. The interest in making such comparison is to
find the edit distance~\cite{SetubalMeidanis*1997}. The edit distance
is a measure to estimate the evolutionary distance between two
sequences, but lacks the information of which global operations were
used to change one sequence in another. These global operations are
called the Genome Rearrangements, which may be, for example,
reversals, transpositions, fissions and fusions. The distance can be
defined for any rearrangement class as the minimum number of
operations required to change one sequence into another. For example,
the reversal distance is the minimum number of reversals required to
change one sequence into another~\cite{BafnaPevzner*1996} and the
transposition distance is the minimum number of
transpositions~\cite{BafnaPevzner*1998}. This work follows the
research line used by Dias e Dias~\cite{DiasDias*2009} and we
introduce Constraint Logic Programming models for sorting by reversals
and sorting by reversals and transpositions based on Constraint
Satisfaction Problems theory and Constraint Optimization Problems
theory. We made a comparison between the Constraint Logic Programming
models for sorting by transpositions, described in Dias and
Dias~\cite{DiasDias*2009}, sorting by reversals and sorting by
reversals and transpositions, with the Integer Linear Programming for
the same problems described in Dias and Souza~\cite{DiasSouza*2007}.

